#summary Available Authenticators

`Mod_auth_external` is, of course, useless unless it has an external authenticator to run. There are some examples of authenticators included in the distribution, and several useful ones are available separately.

== Example External Authenticators in Distribution ==

<dl>
<dt>`test`</dt>
<dd>
Several small dummy external authentication programs written in Perl. These are meant only for testing of `mod_auth*_external`. They accept any user whose password exactly matches his login name. They write lots of debugging info to the error_log file.

*Author and Maintainer*: [http://www.unixpapa.com/white.cgi Jan Wolter]

</dd>

<dt>`auth-mysql`</dt>
<dd>
A external authenticator for authenticating out of a MySQL database. Written in Perl using the DBI/DBD library, so it is easily adapted to any other SQL server.

*Author and Maintainer*: [http://anders.fix.no/software/#unix Anders Nordby]

</dd>
</dl>

== Example Internal Authenticators in Distribution ==

<dl>
<dt>`radius`</dt>
<dd>
A Radius client using code from the publicly available Merit Radius source code. *Unmaintained.*

*Author*: Tyler Allison (allison@nas.nasa.gov)

</dd>

<dt>`sybase`</dt>
<dd>
A function that queries a sybase database and compares the passwords for said user.
*Unmaintained.*

*Author*: br@ota.fr.socgen.com
</dd>
</dl>

== Authentication Modules Available Separately ==

`Mod_auth*_external` can be used either with authenticators specifically written for it or with [http://cr.yp.to/checkpwd.html checkpassword] authenticators.  This is not a [http://www.qmailwiki.org/index.php/Qmail-checkpassword complete list] of `checkpassword` authenticators, but I'll include a few here.

<dl>
<dt>`pwauth`</dt>
<dd>
A setuid-root external authentication program for securely authenticating out of most flavors of Unix shadow password files, or via PAM. Combined with 'pam_smb', this supports NT-style SMB authentication. Supports some Unix lastlog and faillog options.

*Available From:* http://code.google.com/p/pwauth/

*Author and Maintainer*: [http://www.unixpapa.com/white.cgi Jan Wolter]
</dd>

<dt>`vcheck`</dt>
<dd>
An external authenticator by Anders Brander for use against a vpopmail user database.

*Available From:* http://anders.brander.dk/stuff/workings/vcheck/

*Author and Maintainer*: Anders Brander
</dd>

<dt>`checkpassword`</dt>
<dd>
The original checkpassword program authenticates from the Unix system password file, like pwauth.

*Available From:* http://cr.yp.to/checkpwd/install.html

*Author:* D. J. Bernstein
</dd>

<dt>`checkpassword-pam`</dt>
<dd>
Another way to authenticate via PAM.

*Available From:* http://checkpasswd-pam.sourceforge.net/

*Author:* Alexey Mahotkin alexm@hsys.msk.ru
</dd>

<dt>`checkpassword-ldap`</dt>
<dd>
An LDAP authenticator.

*Available From:* http://freshmeat.net/projects/checkpassword-ldap/
</dd>

<dt>`checkpasswd-imap`</dt>
<dd>
An IMAP authenticator written in Python that caches credentials for better performance and so you don't overrun server rate limits.

*Available From:* http://www.namazustudios.com/blog/checkpasswd-imap-a-mod_authnz_external-style-password-checker/
</dd>

<dt>`radcheckpassword`</dt>
<dd>
Checking against external Radius server(s).

*Available From:* http://free.acrconsulting.co.uk/email/radcpw.html

*Author:* Andrew Richards
</dd>
</dl>