#summary Links to Related Software

Here are some relevant links.  See also the [AuthList list of available external authenticators]:

<ul>
<li>[http://httpd.apache.org/ Apache HTTP Server].  Can't run `mod_auth_anything` without it.
</li>

<li>[http://code.google.com/p/pwauth/ pwauth external authenticator]. Used with `mod_auth*_external` for authenicating out of a unix password database or via PAM.
</li>

<li>
Jonathan Weiss's blog entry describing [http://blog.innerewut.de/2007/6/26/apache-2-2-authentication-with-mod_authnz_external how to install mod_authnz_external and pwauth]. Might be a useful reference.
</li>

<li>Gatis Špats describes using mod_auth_external 2.2 to authenticate from a MS SQL 2000 server and gives source code for a Javascript authenticator on [http://www.howtoforge.com/apache2_authentication_mssql2000 HowToForge].  The installation instructions are a bit obsolete, but the Java authenticator would likely work as well as ever.
</li>

<li> [http://sourceforge.net/projects/mod-auth-shadow/ mod_auth_shadow], by Bruce Duggan, appears to be a re-implementation of the same basic concept for authenticating out of shadow password file.  I haven't checked it out enough to decide if it has any advantages over using `pwauth` with `mod_auth_external`. On first inspection it appears to be slightly less portable and paranoid.
</li>

<li>[http://linux.wareseeker.com/Internet/mod-auth-pipe-1.0.zip/319312 mod_auth_pipe] is Alvaro Gamez Machado's development from `mod_auth_shadow`, allowing it to run arbitrary authenticators.  The result ends up doing pretty much the same thing as 'mod_auth_external'.
</li>

<li>[http://mod-auth-script.sourceforge.net/ mod_auth_script] looks like it can be used to perform similar functions to `mod_auth_external`.  It runs the authenticator by generating a sub-request to a CGI program.  I haven't analyzed this approach, but it has obvious advantages in that the authenticator programs are just normal CGIs.
</li>

<li>[http://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/libs/pam/ PAM]. Portable Authentication Modules are libraries that have a common interface and can be linked to a program to do authentication out of different databases.  Linux, FreeBSD and Solaris support PAM.  OpenBSD does not.

If you want to authenticate from a PAM module, but the user your httpd runs as does not have the necessary access, then the `pwauth` external authenticator can be run from `mod_auth*_external` to do the PAM authentication.

The <a href="http://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/libs/pam/modules.html">list of PAM modules</a> includes authenticators for Kerberos, radius, unix password or shadow files, SMB, various SQL databases, and just about anything else imaginable.
</li>

<li>[http://pam.sourceforge.net/mod_auth_pam/ mod_auth_pam]. If you want to use a PAM module to authenticate, and whatever user Apache runs as has the necessary access to do the check, then you don't need an external authenticator, and you should probably use this module instead of `mod_auth*_external` and `pwauth`.  There is such a thing as mod_auth_pam2, which is supposed to work with Apache2.
</li>


<li>[http://www.carc.musc.edu/webNIS/mod_auth_any.html mod_auth_any]. This seems to be similar in function to `mod_auth*_external`. It seems very sparsely documented at this stage, but it from  looking at the source code it seems to pass the login/password to the external authenticator on the command line, which doesn't seem very secure since they'd be trivially visible to anyone doing a 'ps'.
</li>

<li>[http://modules.apache.org/ Apache Module Registry]. A good place to find apache modules.
</li>
</ul>